+++
author = "Guy Prentice"
backgroundImage = "https://iiif.digitalcommonwealth.org/iiif/2/commonwealth:ht250356j/997,3267,2722,961/full/0/default.jpg"
date = 2021-03-09T23:51:09Z
description = "An archaeologist at the Andersonville prison camp describes how a map from the LMEC collections helped solve a puzzle about history"
draft = true
image = "https://iiif.digitalcommonwealth.org/iiif/2/commonwealth:ht250356j/997,3267,2722,961/full/0/default.jpg"
tags = ["guest post", "Civil War", "research", "archaeology"]
title = "A Civil War map goes on trial"

+++
> While researching the history of the Confederate prison camp that existed at Andersonville during the last 14 months of the Civil War, recently retired National Park Service Archeologist Guy Prentice discovered the Leventhal Map & Education Center's copy of George W. Carleton's [1865 map of the Andersonville prison camp](https://collections.leventhalmap.org/search/commonwealth:ht2503558). Dr. Prentice has spent multiple field seasons doing archeology at [Andersonville National Historic Site](https://www.nps.gov/ande/index.htm), and coauthored numerous reports on the archeology of the Andersonville Prison site during the more than three decades of his NPS career. In this guest article, he describes how the appearance of this map in our collections helped to unlock a mystery about the trial of one of the Civil War's most brutal officers.

When I discovered the digitized map of, I quickly recognized the Carleton Andersonville map as being the one that was exhibited and referred to during the trial of Andersonville Prison’s much reviled commandant, Captain Henry Wirz. quickly recognized the Carleton Andersonville map as the one that was exhibited and referred to during the trial of Andersonville Prison’s much reviled commandant, Captain Henry Wirz.

Wirz had the ignominious distinction of being the only person tried, convicted, and executed for war crimes at the end of the Civil War, though many view him as a scapegoat that was wrongly blamed for the nearly 13,000 Union prisoners that died at Andersonville between the time when the first prisoners arrived there on February 24, 1864 and the day that Wirz was arrested on May 7, 1865.

Identification of the Boston Public Library’s _Map of Andersonville, Sumter Co., Georgia_ as the topographic map used during the Wirz trial was made possible by some of the particular features that appear on the map that are referred to by different witnesses at several points during the Wirz trial, but the most import in terms of linking the Carleton map to the Wirz trial map are the following comments made by Major General John Harrison Wilson while he was on the witness stand.

I have visited Andersonville. I have examined the state of the \[Andersonville\] prison and the buildings there and the country generally in the neighborhood of it. I presume the court may have examined this drawing of the prison; it was made under my direction; it does not show quite well enough the topography. The stream here called "Little Sweet Water" is a large creek running as much as fifteen feet in width and five feet deep and runs only about two hundred and fifty feet from the corner of the hospital enclosure. If the main enclosure had been simply enlarged so as to cross that creek, which could have been done very easily, it could have supplied all the troops that could possibly have been put there with ample water both for culinary purposes and for the purpose of police.

The timber in the neighborhood was ample, and, as a matter of course, it being a grain-growing region, the means of supply of provisions were ample, and the means of getting them there were ample. The creek on which the prison was located is not a large one, but simply a spring branch, little springs running out of the side of the hill, making a creek which I suppose will not run more water than would supply for the purposes of an army a larger command than four or five thousand men, because the water does not flow rapidly. There is one spring inside the enclosure, but that would not supply more than a regiment of men, as troops use water and as they ought, to use it. I visited the stockade sometime in the last part of June or the first of July, this year. I found, I think, the remnants of some ten sheds inside the stockade, one set of five on one end of the stockade and the other on the other end. They were simply shed roofs, supported by ordinary square timber cut from woods in the neighborhood, and covered with boards, nothing else. I observed that the character of the buildings outside the stockade was temporary. They were constructed in a similar manner to those sheds, except that the sides were boarded up. The commissary was a stockade building, formed of logs; the others were generally small framed buildings, some one story and some two stories high, and made of boards. My impression is that the barracks erected for the use of the troops on garrison there were such as troops ordinarily construct for themselves—huts. There were some barracks (which had, perhaps, been used as a hospital) which were fair barracks for troops. What troops ever occupied them 1 could not say. \[Wilson 1868a:270; brackets added\]

\[A diagram of the prison was here shown to the witness.\] This survey was made by my directions for the purpose of giving proper information to the War Department as to the situation of affairs at Andersonville. It is simply a survey of the projection of the surface of the ground and of the buildings, and the horizontal lines upon it represent the planes of intersection with the surface, which are supposed to be five feet apart, and the number of these curves multiplied by five will give the difference between the top and the bottom, the highest point of ground in the neighborhood and the lowest, but what it is exactly I cannot say. At this corner \[illustrating\] is the projection of the fortifications which were mounted with guns in these little crotchets, the guns having ample sweep over all the ground except near the edge of the works. I found the guns only in this one fortification, \[illustrating \] I did not go into the others. These little buildings, \[illustrating,\] around in the neighborhood, are buildings connected with the administration of the prison, all of a temporary character. The stockade was formed by cutting the timber from the forest. I think that most of it had been taken from the inside of the enclosure, the timber being probably fifteen feet in height, and sunk into the ground five feet. The timber in the other works was twenty feet long, the two sides being laid so as to fit close together, and then they were bandaged together by a strip of timber inside. Then along on the outside, at various points, were stands for the sentries, and the sentry boxes which served as protection from the weather. Along inside, from I don't know what distance, were small palings of a single strip of deal nailed on the top of little sticks, which was called the "dead-line." The outer line of the stockade was constructed pretty near in the same way. Each presented a large barrier, well protected in all directions, so that no person could get in or out except by receiving a very heavy fire. The earthworks were so situated as to receive troops for the protection and guarding of the place, and this one \[illustrating\] is especially well designed to give the complete control of the whole interior works. I found guns bearing on the interior of the prison. I don't know what number, but this little crenellated line, \[illustrating,\] filled with guns and pointed as they only could be pointed, occupied that position in the works. A piece of embankment was thrown up here \[illustrating\] to protect these guns from the hill in the rear. I have been informed that the embankment was thrown up at the time when Stoneman was supposed to be going in that direction, and as a protection against anything coming from the rear. The enclosure had, I think, twenty-two sheds in it, constructed like those previously described, with the chimney in the centre for the purpose of allowing a fire to be built. They had no siding and very slight accommodation of any kind. I saw a few cots in them. There was no flooring upon the ground at all. There were probably one or two wells in the yard. Some of the sheds were unfinished. This line of sheds, the southern line, was unfinished. I can say that this map is quite accurate, because I examined the whole ground myself, and I know that the whole map was made with particular care by measurement, and was directed to be made accurately. This, together with pencil sketches, which were sent about the same time, will give quite as accurate an idea as could be obtained without a personal inspection of the ground. \[Wilson 1866b:275-276; brackets in original\]

Some of the specific map details that were pointed out by General Wilson over the course of his making references to the Wirz trial map constitute an important part of the evidence leading to the conclusion that the _Map of Andersonville, Sumter Co., Georgia_ in the possession of the Boston Public Library is the Wirz trial map. These include Wilson’s statement that the topographic map presented during the Wirz trial featured contour lines drawn at 5-foot intervals and also the labeling of Sweetwater Creek as Little Sweet Water Creek, the latter being a telling bit of detail missing from any other known contemporary maps. Another revealing piece of information is Wilson’s reference to “A piece of embankment was thrown up here \[illustrating\] to protect these guns from the hill in the rear.” No doubt Wilson was referring to the small section of embankment that appears on the map roughly 400 feet southeast of Andersonville prison’s East Side Redan. This piece of embankment still exists at the same spot at Andersonville National Historic Site where it is a small, fairly inconspicuous archeological feature that was unknown prior to its discovery by NPS park staff and subsequent investigation by NPS archeologists in 2015.

The other evidence leading to the conclusion that the _Map of Andersonville, Sumter Co., Georgia_ held by the Boston Public Library is the Wirz trial map is based on the known identity of its creator, George W. Carleton. George W. Carleton was an Assistant Engineer in the Provisional Confederate Army, who was captured by the U.S. Second Cavalry on April 20, 1865 in Macon, Georgia. The U.S. Second Cavalry formed part of the U.S. Cavalry Corps of the Military Division of the Mississippi, which ended their successful raid through northern Alabama and Georgia by capturing the town of Macon on April 20, 1865 under the command of Maj. General John H. Wilson. After being granted parole, Carleton was sent to Andersonville on May 19, 1865, under orders issued by Maj. General John H. Wilson to produce a topographical survey of the prison and its surroundings. The map that Carleton drew was then submitted to Maj. General Wilson along with his field notes before Carleton was released on June 20, 1865 and sent off to his home in Pemiscot County, Missouri where he enjoyed a successful legal profession, was elected a member of the Constitutional Convention of the State in 1875, was elected a member of the Missouri General Assembly for four terms, and was editor of the Gayosa _Democrat_ (Goodspeed Publishing Company 1888:1187).

It is not currently known exactly when Carleton completed his topographic survey of Andersonville Prison, but it must have been accomplished within a short amount of time, for it was mostly likely transported by Captain Henry E Noyes of the U.S. Second Cavalry while escorting Captain Henry Wirz to Washington, D.C., where they arrived by May 31, 1865 (Townsend 1899:586 {O.R. Ser. 2, Vol. 8, p. 586}). Five days later, on June 5, 1865, Assistant Adjutant-General Edward D. Townsend sent a communique from his office in Washington, D.C. to Maj. General John H. Wilson in Macon informing him that he had received a number of items that General Wilson had sent to him. The received items had been delivered by Capt. Noyes, the man responsible for escorting Wirz to Washington, D.C. for trial in late May 1865 (Noyes 1868:19). Included among the delivered items were “a topographical map and some sketches of Andersonville Prison” (Townsend 1897:960 {O.R. Ser. 1, Vol. 49, Pt. 2, p. 960}). Based on the known sequence of events, there appears to be little reason to doubt that the topographic map that Townsend had received from Capt. Noyes was the one drawn by Carleton.

What is most important about the recent historical contextualization of Carleton’s Andersonville map is that it offers previously unavailable details concerning the layout of the prison camp for both historians and archeologists. It also serves to answer a number of archeological questions that were previously unanswered in other available historical sources. Describing all of the ways that the Carleton map helps refine our knowledge of the archeology at the prison camp would take a lengthy amount of time to prepare, but in terms of big picture information, for the first time, there is a map that unambiguously shows where the camps of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Georgia Reserves and the Florida Light Artillery were located while they served as prison guards. Also revealed is the extent to which the construction of the three stockades had been completed. Other available historical sources were not unanimous as to whether or not the Second Stockade that connected the multiple earthworks constructed around the prison pen had been completed, but the Carleton map shows that it was essentially done. And, although most historical sources had agreed that the outermost Third Stockade was not fully constructed, it wasn’t known how far the work had progressed toward its completion. Carleton’s map shows that only short sections of the Third Stockade wall had been partially mostly on the eastern side of the prison even though the trenches were dug to receive the stockade posts along the prison’s northern and southern ends. Also revealed was the extent to which the Shed Hospital located south of the prison pen had been furnished with sheds and enclosed within its own stockade. The wealth of information that the Carleton map represents to archeologists and historians now that it has been recognized as being the Wirz trial map is truly inestimable.

#### References

Wilson, John H.

1868a General Wilson's Examination of the Prison, Its Condition, His Opinion of Its Location, and What Might Have Been Done to Relieve the Sufferings of the Prisoners. In _Trial of Henry Wirz_. pp. 270-273. Executive Document 23, House of Representatives, 40th Congress, 2nd Session. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

1868b General Wilson’s Explanation of the Diagram of the Prison. In _Trial of Henry Wirz_. pp. 275-276. Executive Document 23, House of Representatives, 40th Congress, 2nd Session. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Goodspeed Publishing Company

1888 _History of Southeast Missouri: Embracing an Historical Account of the Counties of Ste. Genevieve, St. Francois, Perry, Cape Girardeau, Bollinger, Madison, New Madrid, Pemiscot, Dunklin, Scott, Mississippi, Stoddard, Butler, Wayne and Iron, and Including a Department Devoted to the Preservation of Personal, Professional and Private Records_. Goodspeed Publishing Company, Chicago.

Townsend, Edward D.

1897 Correspondence sent from War Department, Adjutant-General’s Office, Washington, June 5, 1865, addressed to Bvt. Maj. Gen. J. H. Wilson, Comdg. Cavalry Corps, Military Division of the Mississippi. In _The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies_, Series 1, Vol. 49, p. 960. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

1899 Correspondence sent from War Department, Adjutant-General’s Office, Washington, May 31, 1865, addressed to Major-General Augur. In _The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies_, Series 2, Vol. 8, p. 586. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.