---
title: "Zhuang Tingfu: Cartographic Encounters and Echoes"
description: The curator of the MacLean Collection examines graphic representations
  of urban Japan from the Tokugawa period
author: Richard Pegg
date: 2021-07-30T04:00:00Z
image: "https://iiif.digitalcommonwealth.org/iiif/2/commonwealth:jh344160s/1519,52,6007,2518/,1200/0/default.jpg"
backgroundImage: "https://iiif.digitalcommonwealth.org/iiif/2/commonwealth:jh344160s/1519,52,6007,2518/,1200/0/default.jpg"
tags: ["guest post", "Kyoto", "Japan", "Tokugawa Period", "East Asia", "collections", "map chat", "MacLean Collection"]
draft: false
---

> This is the second in a series of Map Chats by Richard Pegg, Director and Curator of the [MacLean Collection](https://www.macleancollection.com) in Illinois. For more, Richard's first Map Chat, examining [Kyoto maps of the Tokugawa period](./kyoto-perspectives).

In 1794 the Chinese scholar Zhuang Tingfu (1728-1800 莊廷尃) produced a
large manuscript map of the world with the long title of *The Great Qing
Dynasty world map of tribute bearing countries with spherical
coordinates, past and present* (*Daqing tong zhigong wanguo jingwei
diqiushi fangyu gujin tu* 大清統職貢萬國經緯地球式方輿古今圖). (fig. 1)
This map is now in the Library of Congress. As we shall see, this
manuscript map was created out of an encounter and was six years later
copied in an abridged manuscript edition. The creation of that later
edition, now in the MacLean Collection, led to additional encounters
that became printed as cartographic echoes for decades into the-mid
nineteenth century.

{{< figure 
 src="https://tile.loc.gov/image-services/iiif/service:gmd:gmd3:g3200:g3200:ct003384/full/pct:25/0/default.jpg"

 caption="*The Great Qing Dynasty world map of tribute bearing countries with spherical coordinates, past and present*, China, Qing dynasty, Qianlong era, dated 1794. Zhuang Tingfu (1728-1800), hanging scroll, ink and color on paper, 147 x 105 cm., [Library of Congress](http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.gmd/g3200.ct003384)."

>}}


From the second paragraph of the lengthy lower inscription of the 1794
map, we learn that a British envoy had arrived in Beijing in 1793 to pay
tribute to the Chinese emperor. Britain had sent George Macartney
(1737-1806) to establish the first British embassy in Beijing. This was
the well-known Macartney Mission sent to East Asia as sponsored by the
British throne and the East India Company. Over three months of
encounters, we know several of the Macartney Mission's ninety-two
members presented maps and globes to their Chinese counterparts as part
of official and unofficial exchange. No doubt these included one of the
maps of the world recently produced in Britain that included the
circumnavigations of Commodore John Byron (1765), Captain Samuel Wallis
(1767), Louis-Antoine de Bougainville (1768) and in particular Captain
James Cook's three well-known voyages (1768-71, 1772-75, and 1776-79)
and others. One possible map candidate exchanged was Robert Sayer's (ca.
1724-94) *A General Map of the World or Terraqueous Globe* from 1787;
this one from the MacLean Collection (fig. 2).

{{< figure
 src="https://iiif.digitalcommonwealth.org/iiif/2/commonwealth:v405wp968/full/,1200/0/default.jpg"
 caption="*A General Map of the World or Terraqueous Globe*, Robert Sayer (ca. 1724-94), dated 1787, wall map, copperplate, 107.5 x 127 cm., [MacLean Collection 26743](https://collections.leventhalmap.org/search/commonwealth:v405wp950)."
 class="figure-right"
>}}


Sayer's map presents a double-hemisphere globular projection of the
world that included many of the labeled historic circumnavigation routes
as dotted and sometimes intersecting lines around the world. Here can be
seen multiple routes of Bougainville and Cook thorough the Society,
Friendly and Marquesas Islands of the South Pacific (fig. 3).



Fig. 3 Detail of south Pacific, Robert Sayer, *A General Map of the
World*, dated 1787, MC 26743

Surrounding the maps themselves are insets, typical of European maps of
the period, on a wide range of geological topics and celestial mechanics
like the phases of the earth as it circles the sun, here beautifully
depicted like a blooming flower, with a face on the sun (fig. 4).



Fig. 4 Inset detail, Robert Sayer, *A General Map of the World*, dated
1787, MC 26743

This Diagram entitled the "The Vissitude of Seasons Explained"
illustrates and describes the relative light and darkness according to
the earth's position with respect to the sun at the beginning of each of
the twelve zodiac signs over the course of a year.

In 1800, Zhuang abridged his original map and produced a copy using the
same title *The Great Qing Dynasty world map of tribute bearing
countries with spherical coordinates, past and present* (*Daqing tong
zhigong wanguo jingwei diqiushi fangyu gujin tu*), that included the
lower double-hemisphere globular projection maps and the lengthy lower
inscription, here presented with the inscription over the maps. This
manuscript map, currently in the MacLean Collection, is now mounted as a
hanging scroll drawn in ink and color on paper (fig. 5).



Fig. 5 *The Great Qing Dynasty world map of tribute bearing countries
with spherical coordinates, past and present*, China, Qing dynasty,
Jiajing period (1796-1821), dated 1800, Zhuang Tingfu**, h**anging
scroll, ink and color on paper, 60 x 93 cm (image), 211 x 104 cm
(overall), MC29773

The map was dated and signed, "Jiajing (reign) fifth year (1800), the
*gengshen* (year), last month of summer (August). Maps and descriptions
planned and edited by Zhuang Tingfu from Jinling (fig. 6)."


Fig. 6 Detail of date and signature, Zhuang Tingfu, *The Great Qing
Dynasty world map of tribute bearing countries with spherical
coordinates, past and present,* dated 1800, MC29773

And according to the closing inscription, the map was created in 1800 as
part of an imperial edition of thirty-one records prepared exclusively
to be placed in the Imperial Archives Library in Beijing. The MacLean
map as part of this group of maps and documents was produced in
celebration of important documents originally produced during Emperor
Qianlong's (1711-99, r. 1736-95) lengthy reign, as 1800 marked the
one-year anniversary of Qianlong's death. A detail on Zhuang's map of
the same area of the South Pacific we saw from Sayer's map shows similar
hash-marked routes with toponyms such a Dog Island (*quandao*) and Saint
Bernanado (*shengbaiernaduo*) in the Society Islands (fig. 7).



Fig. 7 Detail of South Pacific, Zhuang Tingfu, *The Great Qing Dynasty
world map of tribute bearing countries with spherical coordinates, past
and present,* dated 1800, MC29773

These islands were part of Byron's discoveries and this depicted route
may be his voyage of 1765. Another hash-marked route through the
Marquesas Islands (*mengduose*) is likely Cook's passage in 1774.
Although Zhuang does not label these hash-marked routes they seem likely
to have been faithfully copied from a British original, possibly without
full understanding of their meaning, like Sayer's.

The relatively recent rediscovery of Zhuang's 1800 map has shed light on
other related encounters and subsequent cartographic productions. There
is textual and visual evidence that Korean envoys and scholars were able
to view Zhuang's 1800 map. In Korea in 1834, Zhuang's 1800 map was
rendered into a pair of woodblock-printed maps produced through the
collaboration of Kim Jeongho (1804-66? 金正浩) and Choe Hangi (1803-77
崔漢綺) (fig. 8).


Fig. 8 *Maps of the front and back \[hemispheres\] of the globe (Jigu
jeonhudo),* Korea, Joseon dynasty, Kim Jeongho and Choe Hangi, dated
1834**,** woodblock print, ink on paper, 88.2 x 42 cm.**,** Sungshin
Women's University Collection, Seoul,
<https://www.sungshin.ac.kr/museum/14949/subview.do?enc=Zm5jdDF8QEB8JTJGYmJzJTJGbXVzZXVtJTJGNDE3MSUyRjg1NjA5JTJGYXJ0Y2xWaWV3LmRvJTNGcGFnZSUzRDElMjZzcmNoQ29sdW1uJTNEJTI2c3JjaFdyZCUzRCUyNmJic0NsU2VxJTNEJTI2YmJzT3BlbldyZFNlcSUzRCUyNnJnc0JnbmRlU3RyJTNEJTI2cmdzRW5kZGVTdHIlM0QlMjZpc1ZpZXdNaW5lJTNEZmFsc2UlMjZwYXNzd29yZCUzRCUyNg%3D%3D>

Kim and Choe produced a set of four maps, consisting of a pair of
terrestrial maps and a pair of celestial maps entitled *Maps of the
Front and Back \[hemispheres\] of the Globe* (K. *Jigu jeonhudo*
地球前後圖) and the *Maps of the Fixed Stars of the Northern and
Southern Yellow Road* (*Huangdo boknamhang seongdo* 黃道北南恆星圖). Kim
Jeongho, perhaps Korea's best-known geographer and cartographer, was
known for his massive *Territorial Map of the Great East* (*Daedong
yeojido*) of 1861. Choe Hangi was a polymath, bibliophile and a prolific
writer.

The 1834 *Maps of the Front and Back \[hemispheres\] of the Globe* are a
to-scale pair of terrestrial maps in the same double-hemisphere globular
format as Zhuang's 1800 map. The most obvious difference is the total
lack of an inscription on the Korean 1834 maps. The 1834 maps do however
include all the toponyms and other details of the 1800 map including the
hash-marked maritime voyages of European explorers.

That Zhuang's 1800 map was known in Korea can also be confirmed in Yi
Gyugyeong's (1788-1856李圭景) encyclopedia *Oju's Scattered Manuscripts
of Glosses and Comments* (*Oju yeonmun jangjeon sango*五洲衍文長箋散稿),
compiled in the 1840s, some ten years after Kim and Choe's map. It has
an entry with the map's description, the entire inscription from
Zhuang's 1800 map and a description of the 1834 *Maps of the Front and
Back \[hemispheres\] of the Globe* created by Kim and Choe confirming
not only an encounter but the importance of the Zhuang 1800 map and the
*Maps of the Front and Back \[hemispheres\] of the Globe* at the time;
and two decades later when Choe included them in his *Essential
Geography of the World* (地球典要) of 1857. Yi, Kim and Choe all had
access to some version of the Zhuang 1800 map. How and why this came to
pass is still unknown, but all three felt it should play an active part
in an emerging Korean world geography.

Zhuang's 1800 map was printed as well as updated and enhanced in China
well into the middle of the nineteenth century. At some point an undated
printed version was produced and the MacLean Collection has a copy (fig.
9). The maps and texts are faithfully copied, including the hash-marked
routes, on the printed version while the overall scale is increased
slightly.



Fig. 9 *The Great Qing Dynasty world map of tribute bearing countries
with spherical coordinates, past and present* (*Daqing tong zhigong
wanguo jingwei diqiushi fangyu gujin tu*), China, Qing dynasty, dated
1800, 19^th^ century print, Zhuang Tingfu (1728-1800), sheet map, ink
and color on paper, MC 33486

There is an informative hand-written annotation in English on this map
confirming a European missionary's encounter with Zhuang's 1800
original. Robert Morrison (1782-1834), a Scottish Protestant missionary,
arrived in China in 1807 and spent the following twenty-seven years
based in Macao. In 1817 he published his *A View of China, for
Philological Purposes; Containing a Sketch of Chinese Chronology,
Geography. Government, Religion and Customs*. On page six of that work
Morrison cites having seen Zhuang's 1800 map of the world. And the
anonymous hand-written annotation on the top right of the printed Zhuang
copy in the MacLean Collection quotes and cites Morrison's encounter
with Zhuang's 1800 map (fig. 10).


Fig. 10 Annotation detail, Zhuang Tingfu, *The Great Qing Dynasty world
map of tribute bearing countries with spherical coordinates, past and
present,* dated 1800, 19^th^ century print, MC 33486

The MacLean Collection has another Zhuang Tingfu inspired map in the
printed *Map of the World* 萬國輿圖 dated to 1858 (fig. 11).



Fig. 11 *Map of the World (Wanguo yutu),* China, Qing dynasty, dated
1858***,*** Woodblock print, ink, color and gold on paper, 127 x75 cm.
each***,*** MC31582

There are numerous similarities and differences both visually and
textually between Zhuang's 1800 map and this 1858 map. Visually the
presentation of a lengthy horizontal inscription above the double
hemisphere globular map is similar, although the 1858 main text is
abridged. The first difference is the scale of the overall presentation
of the maps proper, with the 1858 map thrice the size of the 1800 map.
Another difference is that the hemispheres in the 1858 map are reversed.
This is important to note that a conscious decision has been made to
re-orient the two hemispheres. The typical European orientation places
the Americas on the left, as seen on Zhuang's 1800 map, as likely based
on a European map. The 1858 map orientation places the Americas to the
right, positioning China in the center of the world visually between the
two hemispheres. Another difference is the hash-marked lines of the
various European's circumnavigations are absent. The 1858 map also
includes information of discoveries and surveys completed later and not
available in 1800 or 1794, such as Lake Chad discovered in the 1820s in
Central Africa, the separation of Mexico and Texas in the 1820s, the
Great Salt Lake discovered in the 1830s, or Sabrina Land, south of
Australia, discovered in the 1840s.

The 1858 map also has differences that enhance the overall presentation.
The large separated characters of the title itself are each a pastiche
of floral and abstract design elements with shading added to imply
three-dimensionality (fig. 12).


Fig. 12 Chinese Character for "Map" (*Tu*) in title, *Map of the World,*
dated 1858, MC31582

This kind of stylized decorative font can be found on other
contemporaneous maps of East Asia, in a manner similarly found on
American commercial wall maps for example published in the nineteenth
century where the use of highly stylized titles and decorative borders
were ubiquitous.

The 1858 map, like the Sayer map, is surrounded by insets of geological
topics, here depicting the world's highest mountains and volcanoes in
the bottom corners, and the more familiar insets related to celestial
mechanics, including the same diagram of sunlight over the course of a
year as found on the Sayer map above, here named "Diagram of the
Topography of the twenty-four fortnightly Periods over One Year"
(*zhounian jieqi dixing tu*) (fig. 13).



Fig. 13 Inset detail, *Map of the World,* dated 1858, MC31582

Boldly colored also like a blooming flower, here the sun is red with a
gold-leaf character for "sun" in the center while the outer ring depicts
the earth over twelve months and the relative positions of light and
darkness according to the time of year.

We have briefly considered the life of a historical map made in China
and related questions. Like what happened after it was made? Where was
it viewed and by whom? Zhuang's 1800 manuscript map was the source for
an astonishing number of encounters and echoes during the nineteenth
century and questions persist. What was it about this map that made it
so popular? And how did so many people from so many different countries
get access to it in Beijing? Its rediscovery in the MacLean Collection
has not only brought together related materials to the MacLean
Collection but pointed to numerous interesting encounters and links
connecting the historical past with the present.

#### Bibliography

Hevia, James L. *Cherishing Men from Afar: Qing Guest Ritual and the
Macartney Embassy of 1793*, Duke University Press, 1995.

Morrison, Robert. *A View of China, for Philological Purposes;
Containing a Sketch of Chinese Chronology, Geography. Government,
Religion and Customs*, East India Company: Macao, 1817.

Smith, Richard J. *Chinese Maps: Images of 'All Under Heaven.'"* New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Yi Gyugyeong. Oju's Scattered Manuscripts of Glosses and Comments (*Oju
yeonmun jangjeon sango*). Seoul: Dongguk munhwasa, reprint, 1959

Pegg, Richard A. "Jesuit Maps in China and Korea: Connecting the Past to
the Present," in *Time in Space: Representing the Past in Maps*, David
Rumsey Center, Stanford University, University of Chicago Press, 2020,
ch. 3, 63-76

\"A Chinese Map of the World from 1858,\" *Mapline*, Newberry Library,
Autumn 2016, 1-11.

*Cartographic Traditions in East Asian Maps*, University of Hawaii
Press, 2014

"*World Views: Late 18^th^ Century Approaches to Mapmaking in China
and Britain*," Orientations*, Vol. 44, no. 3, April 2013, 84-89.
